# Moro2024 et al. (2024) — Full Text Extraction

**Source file:** 2024_moro2024.pdf
**Pages:** 9
**Extracted by:** MemoVoice research pipeline (PyMuPDF)

---

## Full Paper Content

“Does speech in patients with different Parkinson’s disease subtypes decline 
over time?”
Vanessa Brzoskowski dos Santos a
, Fernanda Venzke Zardin b
, Rui Rothe-Neves c,  
Maira Rozenfeld Olchik a,d,e,*
a Graduate Program in Medicine, Medical Sciences, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
b Speech Therapy Program, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
c Phonetics Lab, Faculdade de Letras, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil
d Neurology Service, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
e Department of Surgery and Orthopedics, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul - Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Parkinson’s disease
Speech acoustics
Tremor
Speech disorders
Longitudinal Studies
Speech
A B S T R A C T
Purpose: This study investigates whether speech changes over time in patients with different motor subtypes of 
Parkinson’s disease (PD).
Methods: This longitudinal study included 60 individuals with PD, classified into tremor-dominant (n = 42) and 
non-tremor-dominant (n = 18) subtypes according to the Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson’s Dis­
ease Rating Scale. Participants were assessed at three points: baseline, 12 months, and 24 months. Speech 
samples were collected from diadochokinesis (/pataka/) and 60-second monologue tasks. The analyzed acoustic 
variables included syllable number, duration, phonation time, articulation rate, average syllable duration (ASD), 
and pause ratio.
Results: There were no statistically significant differences between groups regarding age (p = 0.298), disease 
duration (p = 0.098), age at symptom onset (p = 0.879), HY (p = 0.895), and UPDRS (p = 0.224) at baseline. The 
tremor- and non-tremor-dominant subtypes did not show significant differences over time when analyzed 
separately in articulation time metrics. However, significant differences were observed between the subtypes in 
all variables of the diadochokinesia task, including the number of syllables (p < 0.001), phonation time (p <
0.001), articulation rate (p = 0.002), and ASD (p = 0.028). Regarding the trend analysis, for the monologue, the 
following were observed: dominant non-tremor [number of syllables (R2 = 0.978), phonation time (R2 = 0.860) 
and pause ratio (R2 = 0.766)] and tremor [number of syllables (R2 = 0.989) and phonation time (R2 = 0.974)]. 
For the diadochokinesis: dominant non-tremor [number of syllables (R2 = 0.934) and phonation time (R2 =
0.977)] and tremor [ASD (R2 = 0.787)]
Conclusion: Over three years, the speech revealed that individuals with tremor and non-tremor subtypes exhibited 
stable patterns over time. Distinct speech differences emerged between the two groups, and articulation time 
metrics proved to be an effective tool for distinguishing between subtypes.This task emerged as a relevant 
approach from which biomarkers can be derived.
1. Introduction
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease character­
ized by clinical variability, leading to a broad range of symptom pre­
sentations and differing progression rates [1–3]. Without specific 
biomarkers for accurate diagnosis or monitoring, subtyping has emerged 
as an important strategy to better understand disease progression [4]. 
Subtypes are typically identified based on clinical characteristics, 
genetic factors, or brain imaging patterns, which may help differentiate 
faster-progressing, more aggressive forms of PD from those with a 
slower trajectory [5,6]. This approach is thought to facilitate more 
personalized treatments, medication adjustments, and provide insights 
into the distinct mechanisms underlying PD pathogenesis [7,8].
Motor subtype classification in Parkinson’s disease (PD), based on 
disease characteristics and measured according to the Movement Dis­
orders Society −
Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS- 
* Corresponding author at: Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
E-mail address: molchik@hcpa.edu.br (M.R. Olchik). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Clinical Parkinsonism & Related Disorders
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/clinical-parkinsonism-and-related-disorders
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prdoa.2025.100372
Received 16 May 2025; Received in revised form 19 July 2025; Accepted 21 July 2025  
PRDOA 13 (2025) 100372 
Available online 21 July 2025 
2590-1125/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc/4.0/ ). 


---

UPDRS), is typically divided into tremor-dominant, non-tremor-domi­
nant, and mixed/indeterminate subtypes [1,9,10]. Individuals with 
tremor and non-tremor subtypes are thought to have distinct clinical and 
genetic profiles with variable complication risks [11]. The PD tremor- 
dominant subtype is generally considered to progress more slowly, 
typically presenting with resting tremor and gait abnormalities [12]. In 
contrast, the PD non-tremor subtype is often associated with a more 
rapid progression, including severe motor deficits such as bradykinesia 
and axial symptoms, and may be linked to greater cognitive decline, 
speech and swallowing impairments, higher dementia incidence, and 
neuropsychiatric disorders [13–15].
Regarding speech characteristics in Parkinson’s motor subtypes, few 
studies have examined motor subtypes associated with distinct patterns 
of speech disruption (Goberman 2005; Skodda and Schlegel 2008). 
Emerging evidence suggests that the motor subtypes of Parkinson’s 
disease, such as tremor-dominant and postural instability/gait difficulty 
(PIGD), may be associated with differing patterns of neurodegeneration 
and dopamine depletion. Such differences in the underlying patho­
physiology are thought to potentially influence the neural control of 
speech production, which could help explain the variability observed in 
speech impairments and their progression across subtypes [16–19]. 
Cross-sectional research does not offer a consensus on speech variations 
among these patients [16,20,21]. Some studies suggest that the non- 
tremor subtype may exhibit more pronounced phonatory changes, 
with differences in variables such as cepstral peak prominence, pitch 
breaks, monopitch, and resonant frequency attenuation [16,20]. On the 
other hand, [21] found no significant differences in phonation variables, 
prosody, or fluency between these groups, suggesting similar patterns 
between individuals with different subtypes. However, findings by [20] 
suggest that the non-tremor subtype may exhibit greater irregularity in 
syllable spacing during diadochokinesis, distinguishing it from control 
groups. In monologue tasks, individuals with different subtypes appear 
to differ in articulatory decay, reduced speaking time, and inappropriate 
silences.
Recent research by Rusz et al. (2023) suggests that individuals 
classified within the tremor-dominant group may exhibit less severe 
speech impairment and a more favorable prognosis regarding speech 
disorders. However, they may still experience declines in vocal quality, 
articulatory precision, timing abnormalities, and monopitch [22]. In 
contrast, individuals with the non-tremor-dominant subtype may pre­
sent a higher prevalence of speech disturbances [23]. These findings 
align with our cross-sectional study [24], which also observed speech 
variations among Parkinson’s Disease motor subtypes. Specifically, in­
dividuals with the non-tremor-dominant subtype exhibited poorer 
speech performance compared to both other PD subtypes and the control 
group across sustained vowel, diadochokinesis, and monologue tasks. 
While tremor-dominant symptoms were primarily associated with 
phonation-related changes, non-tremor-dominant symptoms appeared 
to have a greater impact on articulation.
Longitudinal studies on speech production in individuals with PD 
suggest a progression of speech impairment, as observed in both 
perceptual auditory and acoustic analyses [25]. Evidence indicates that 
as PD advances, there may be declines in pitch variability, intensity, 
voice modulation, a faster speech rate, and an increase in pauses, which 
tend to deteriorate [26–30]. However, the way these speech character­
istics evolve across different motor subtypes over time remains unclear. 
To date, only one study has investigated speech changes over six years, 
evaluated by patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs), and found 
no significant differences in self-perceived speech changes across motor 
subtypes. This assessment relied on the speech item of the MDS-UPDRS 
subscale, in which individuals subjectively rated the severity of their 
speech difficulties [31]. Given the reliance on self-report measures, it is 
uncertain whether objective markers follow a similar trajectory. The 
evolution of speech characteristics, particularly in terms of acoustic 
articulation parameters across PD motor subtypes over time, has yet to 
be fully elucidated.
This longitudinal study examines speech changes over three years in 
individuals classified into two different motor subtypes of Parkinson’s 
disease (PD). Specifically, it investigates whether time-related speech 
characteristics, assessed through diadochokinesis (DDK) and monologue 
tasks, evolve differently in tremor-dominant and non-tremor-dominant 
subtypes of Parkinson’s disease. The study addresses the following 
research questions: (1) Do speech measures assessed through the DDK 
task change over time across motor subtypes? (2) Do speech measures 
assessed through the monologue task change over time across motor 
subtypes? (3) Do tremor-dominant and non-tremor-dominant subtypes 
exhibit distinct speech trajectories over time?
2. Methods
2.1. Participants
This research is part of a cross-sectional study that initially recruited 
115 individuals diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease from the Neurology 
Service (Movement Disorders and Speech Therapy Clinics) of a univer­
sity hospital in southern Brazil in 2021 (Dos Santos et al., not press). 
Following attrition due to non-attendance or withdrawal, 60 individuals 
were retained for longitudinal follow-up, with data collected at three 
points: baseline, 12 months (time 1), and 24 months (time 2). Partici­
pants who did not attend within the 11-month to 13-month time window 
following the previous data collection were also excluded from this 
sample. The participants were monitored from March 2021 to December 
2023. Fig. 1 presents the flowchart of data collection, including partic­
ipant follow-up losses.
Eligibility criteria included a diagnosis of idiopathic PD made by a 
neurologist, and Brazilian Portuguese was the participant’s native lan­
guage. Exclusion criteria were based on a history of previous neuro­
logical events, sensory or motor disorders, structural abnormalities 
affecting voice and speech, severe hearing loss, and a diagnosis of de­
mentia. All participants were on continuous medication use throughout 
the study period. There was no initiation or discontinuation of phar­
macological treatment during the trial. All data collections were con­
ducted during the ON medication state to ensure greater uniformity in 
assessment conditions. Thus, medication-related variations were not 
included as a variable in the study. Clinical and sociodemographic data 
were collected from electronic medical records, including sex, age, ed­
ucation, time of disease, age of onset, Hoehn and Yahr Disability Stage 
Scale, and Movement Disorder Society −
Unified Parkinson’s Disease 
Rating Scale −
MDS-UPDRS (part III). The study was conducted in 
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the insti­
tutional ethics committee under number 2019–0789. All participants 
provided written informed consent.
2.2. Motor subtype classification
Subtype classification was performed according to the MDS-UPDRS 
(Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale) 
guidelines, in which higher scores indicate a more severe impairment of 
PD symptoms. For classification, the following score was used: Domi­
nant tremor −for a TD/NT ratio ≥1.5; Non-dominant tremor for TD/NT 
≤1.0; and Mixed for a ratio > 1.0 but < 1.5 [32–34].
2.3. Data collection
2.3.1. Speech recording procedure
Speech samples were recorded in a quiet environment using a 
portable TASCAM DR-07X recorder and a KARSECT HT-9 headset 
microphone. A unidirectional microphone with phantom technology 
was placed approximately 5 cm from the speaker’s mouth, outside the 
main exhalation stream, to ensure a fixed distance and avoid air puffs 
from speech production. Audio recordings were sampled at 44.1 kHz 
and quantized at 16-bit resolution [35]. A single trained researcher 
V.B. dos Santos et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Clinical Parkinsonism & Related Disorders 13 (2025) 100372 
2 


---

Fig. 1. Flowchart of data collection and loss of follow-up of individuals over the three years. PD: Parkinson’s disease; ASD: average syllable duration; df: degrees 
of freedom.
V.B. dos Santos et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Clinical Parkinsonism & Related Disorders 13 (2025) 100372 
3 


---

collected all speech samples during an approximately 20-minute session. 
At the time of speech recording, all participants were under the effect of 
medication. For the analysis, the audios were transferred later to a 
computer using the Praat software (version 6.1.55).
All collected speech tasks followed this sequence: 
1. Diadochokinesis (DDK) −
participants were asked to perform 
“sequential movement rates” through the syllables /pataka/ as 
quickly as possible [36] in a single expiration.;
2. Sixty seconds of monologue responding to the question, “What have 
you done today since waking up?”. In cases where individuals did not 
speak throughout the period, the researcher encouraged them and 
repeated the exact phrase (“What else have you done today?”). 
Before any analysis, audio recordings were reviewed to ensure they 
met the necessary acoustic criteria, such as a clear speech signal, 
absence of clipping, and minimal background noise, and to remove 
any recordings affected by external interferences. The recording re­
view process combined both objective and subjective components. 
Initially, all recordings were independently analyzed by two trained 
raters (VBS and MRO), who applied objective criteria based on 
predefined acoustic parameters, such as the 200-millisecond 
threshold for identifying pauses. In cases of disagreement between 
the two raters, the recordings were referred to a third evaluator 
(ALB), who was blinded to the previous assessments and indepen­
dently analyzed the audio. Another researcher (FZV) then reviewed 
the scoresheet and made the final decision. This procedure ensured 
greater reliability and consistency in the decision-making process. 
Additionally, all raters were previously trained to apply the criteria 
in a standardized manner, aiming to minimize inter-rater variability 
and ensure the reproducibility of the analyses.
2.3.2. Acoustic speech analysis
Acoustic speech analysis was performed using the PRAAT software 
(version 6.1.55). A script automatically detected intensity peaks for the 
DDK and monologue variables. As Brazilian Portuguese only allows 
vowels in the central syllable, counting the intensity peaks is equivalent 
to determining the number of syllables. This script previously demon­
strated reliability, as high correlations between manual and automatic 
syllable counts were found when tested in other languages, indicating 
that this automated approach is sufficiently reliable for assessing and 
comparing speech rate across participants and tasks [37]. The Praat 
script was adapted based on a publicly available script and previously 
published references. The adaptations were tailored to the specific needs 
of this study while maintaining validated parameters that were used in 
previous research. [37–39]. The analyzed parameters were based on 
[40] and [41].
In the monologue task, pauses were included in the analysis for all 
participants, including those who produced utterances shorter than 60 s. 
No distinction was made between short and long samples; all were 
analyzed using the same pause detection criteria and manual review 
procedures. Participants were instructed to speak for up to 60 s; how­
ever, many were unable to reach this duration due to task-related dif­
ficulties. In contrast to the monologue, the DDK task was interrupted at 
the first pause or breath, and only the uninterrupted speech stretch was 
taken for analysis. Therefore, the pause ratio was obtained only in the 
monologue.
The pause ratio was defined as the total duration of pauses divided by 
the total task duration. The total task duration corresponds to the whole 
period of analyzed speech production. Pauses were first identified as 
segments of silence based on a 200-millisecond threshold, as specified 
by the automated script’s parameters. The use of a 200-ms threshold 
helped exclude most short articulatory occlusions (e.g., those involved 
in producing plosives), ensuring greater accuracy in identifying lin­
guistic pauses. The detected pauses were then manually reviewed and, 
when necessary, corrected to ensure that all perceptible interruptions in 
speech were included.
Thus, the following variables were considered for the articulation 
tasks: number of syllables (number), duration (seconds), phonation time 
(seconds), articulation rate (percentage), average syllable duration −
ASD (seconds), and pause ratio (percentage).
2.4. Statistical analysis
The independent variables analyzed in this study included gender, 
age, education, disease duration, age at symptom onset, disease stage 
according to the Hoehn and Yahr scale, and the Unified Parkinson’s 
Disease Rating Scale score (total score of Part III). These variables were 
described using appropriate descriptive statistics, such as absolute and 
relative frequencies for categorical variables and measures of central 
tendency and dispersion for continuous variables (mean and standard 
deviation, median, and interquartile range). The choice of statistical 
tests was based on the distribution of the data, assessed using the 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Shapiro-Wilk normality tests. To compare the 
evolution of the different motor subtypes over time, a Generalized 
Linear Model (GLM) with gamma distribution was used.
The generalized linear model (GLM) is an extension of classical linear 
regression models, allowing for the analysis of dependent variables that 
do not follow a normal distribution. This statistical approach is espe­
cially useful when dealing with categorical, count, or skewed response 
variables, as it accommodates distributions from the exponential family, 
such as binomial, Poisson, and gamma. The GLM consists of three 
fundamental components: the distribution of the response variable, the 
link function that relates the mean of the response to the linear pre­
dictor, and the linear predictor itself, formed by a combination of co­
efficients and independent variables. This flexibility makes the GLM a 
robust tool for modeling complex phenomena across various scientific 
fields, ensuring a better fit to the characteristics of empirical data [42].
In this study, subtype, time (representing different assessment mo­
ments), and the interaction between them were considered as fixed ef­
fects to investigate longitudinal differences between groups. As a 
random effect, only one random intercept per participant was included 
to capture baseline individual variability. We chose not to include 
covariates to preserve statistical power and avoid overfitting, given the 
limited sample size. Thus, a more parsimonious model was chosen, 
prioritizing the robustness of the main effects.
Gamma regression was specifically used to model response variables 
that are strictly positive and continuous, characterized by a right- 
skewed distribution. This model is particularly useful in contexts 
where the data present heteroscedasticity and do not follow the 
assumption of normality. This model was used to analyze the time 
interaction in each motor subtype and the interaction between motor 
subtypes throughout the three periods analyzed [42]. We tested 
different distributions to model the dependent variable, including 
Gamma, log-normal, and inverse Gaussian, to identify the best fit for the 
data. The final model selection was based on statistical fit criteria, such 
as the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and the Bayesian Information 
Criterion (BIC), as well as residual analysis and model diagnostics. The 
Gamma distribution showed the best fit and was also consistent with the 
empirical characteristics of the data, justifying its adoption in the final 
model, which will be commented on henceforth.
A trend analysis was performed to assess the temporal evolution of 
outcomes within each subtype, modeling the mean value of the depen­
dent variable at each point in time. Specifically, a simple linear regres­
sion model was applied to each group to estimate the slope of the 
temporal trajectory, representing the tendency for the outcome to in­
crease or decrease over time. The coefficient of determination (R2) was 
reported to indicate how well the fitted line matched the observed data. 
However, a comparison test to assess the statistical significance of the 
slope was not performed at this stage. Therefore, this analysis only al­
lows us to identify the average pattern of outcomes over time, contrib­
uting to understanding the longitudinal evolution of the phenomenon 
under study.
V.B. dos Santos et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Clinical Parkinsonism & Related Disorders 13 (2025) 100372 
4 


---

The criterion for statistical significance adopted was p < 0.05. All 
analyses were conducted using the statistical software SPSS, version 
22.0.
3. Results
The final sample consisted of 60 individuals with Parkinson’s dis­
ease, 42 (70 %) with the tremor subtype, and 18 (30 %) with the non- 
tremor subtype. Table 1 presents the sociodemographic data for the 
groups at each of the three measurement time points. There were no 
statistically significant differences between the groups regarding age (p 
= 0.298), disease duration (p = 0.098), age of symptom onset (p =
0.879), HY (p = 0.895) and UPDRS (p = 0.224) at baseline. Similarly, no 
significant differences were observed between the groups at time 1 and 
time 2. No stratification or comparative analysis by sex was performed 
in this study, due to the limited sample size and sample losses across the 
three evaluation moments.
Fig. 2 presents the results of the diadochokinesia variables, expressed 
as mean and standard deviation, for each subtype over a three-year 
period. No statistically significant differences were observed over time 
within each subtype for the variables analyzed: number of syllables (p =
0.056), phonation time (p = 0.315), articulation rate (p = 0.357), and 
ASD (p = 0.668). These results indicate that, in the three moments 
evaluated, individuals with tremor and non-tremor subtypes presented 
stable performance, with no significant differences in the time metrics in 
diadochokinesia over time. It is important to highlight that, although it 
did not reach statistical significance, a consistent trend was observed in 
the variation in the number of syllables over time.
However, a significant difference between the subtypes was observed 
in all diadochokinesia variables, including number of syllables (p <
0.001), phonation time (p < 0.001), articulation rate (p = 0.002), and 
ASD (p = 0.028). Table 2 presents the comparison data between the 
tremor and non-tremor subtypes at the three assessment times for each 
variable. Individuals in the non-tremor subtype produced a smaller 
number of syllables, had shorter phonation time, reduced articulation 
rate, and longer mean syllable duration (ASD), compared to the tremor 
group. These findings indicate that the subtypes differ significantly from 
each other in the performance of the diadochokinesia task over time.
Fig. 3 presents the results of the monologue variables, expressed as 
means and standard deviations, for each subtype over the three-year 
period. No statistically significant differences were observed over time 
within each subtype for the monologue variables analyzed: number of 
syllables (p = 0.837), duration (p = 0.908), phonation time (p = 0.679), 
articulation rate (p = 0.408), ASD (p = 0.295), and pause ratio (p =
0.612). These results indicate that, at the three time points evaluated, 
individuals with tremor and non-tremor subtypes presented stable per­
formance, with no significant differences in monologue time metrics 
over time.
There was also no difference between the subtypes in relation to the 
monologue variables: [number of syllables (p = 0.094), duration (p =
0.787), phonation time (p = 0.142), articulation rate (p = 0.295), ASD 
(p = 0.600) and pause ratio (p = 0.195)]. Thus showing that there were 
no significant differences between the subtypes in the time metrics of the 
monologue task over the three years.
Fig. 4 shows trend analyses for variables with R2 > 0.6 in the 
monologue and diadochokinesis tasks for each motor subtype. For the 
monologue variables, there was the following trend: non-tremor domi­
nant [syllable number (R2 = 0.978), phonation time (R2 = 0.860) and 
pause ratio (R2 = 0.766)] and tremor [syllable number (R2 = 0.989) and 
phonation time (R2 = 0.974)]. For the diadochokinesis variables, there 
was the following trend: non-tremor dominant [syllable number (R2 =
0.934) and phonation time (R2 = 0.977)] and tremor [ASD (R2 =
0.787)].
4. Discussion
This study investigated speech patterns in Parkinson’s disease sub­
types over a three-year period. These findings revealed no significant 
differences in sociodemographic or clinical characteristics between the 
subtypes, indicating baseline equivalence across these variables. How­
ever, significant differences emerged in the diadochokinesis (DDK) task, 
where the non-tremor and tremor-dominant groups differed in syllable 
count, phonation time, articulation rate, and average syllable duration. 
In contrast, the monologue task did not reveal differences between the 
subtypes, suggesting comparable performance in spontaneous speech. 
Furthermore, when evaluated separately, both the tremor subtype and 
the non-tremor subtype did not show significant differences in articu­
lation time metrics during the analyzed period.
Significant differences were observed between the subtypes in the 
DDK task. Individuals in the non-tremor group demonstrated a lower 
syllable count, shorter phonation time, reduced articulation rate, and 
longer average sound duration (ASD) than the tremor group. These 
findings align with other studies in the literature, which also reported 
these changes when comparing the non-tremor subtype with a control 
group in cross-sectional studies [17,20,24]. However, our longitudinal 
study found that these characteristics distinguishing the subtypes per­
sisted over time and sufficiently differentiated the groups significantly. 
These results suggest that the non-tremor subtype may be associated 
with more pronounced changes in rapid, repetitive, and maximum- 
performance articulatory tasks, likely due to greater motor rigidity 
and bradykinesia, conditions frequently observed in these individuals 
[15,43]. Impairments in DDK task performance reflect challenges in 
motor control, specifically affecting tasks that require coordinated 
movements, and may serve as a distinguishing feature between PD 
subtypes [35,40].
The monologue task did not reveal subtype differences across time 
points. These findings are consistent with other cross-sectional studies in 
the literature [21] (Dos Santos et al., in press). Brown and Spencer 
(2020) also did not observe differences between the groups regarding 
pause rate during the reading task. Similarly, this variable was not 
evident in our cross-sectional study (Dos Santos et al., in press), as it did 
not distinguish the subtypes from each other during spontaneous speech 
production. The lack of distinction between the groups in the monologue 
task may suggest that spontaneous speech production reflects a different 
Table 1 
Sociodemographic data.
Baseline
Time 1
Time 2
Tremor 
(n = 42)
Non-tremor 
(n = 18)
p-value
Tremor 
(n = 42)
Non-tremor 
(n = 18)
p-value
Tremor 
(n = 35)
Non-tremor 
(n = 12)
p-value
Male
26 (61.9 %)
9 (50 %)
0.320
26 (61.9 %)
9 (50 %)
0.320
21 (60 %)
7 (58.33 %)
0.280
Age
59.27 (±8.85)
63.0 (±11.83)
0.298
60.27 (±8.85)
64.0 (±11.83)
0.298
58.57 (±10.13)
59.50 (±12.12)
0.798
Education (years)
7.97 (±3.24)
8.73 (±3.86)
0.555
−
−
−
−
−
−
Time of disease
11.86 (±6.13)
15.6 (±6.86)
0.098
12.86 (±6.13)
16.6 (±6.86)
0.098
13.91 (±5.68)
18.5 (±5.5)
0.163
Age of onset
47.40 (±8.47)
47.40 (±12.50)
0.879
−
−
−
−
−
−
HY
1.5 (1–3)
3 (1–4)
0.895
−
−
−
−
−
−
UPDRS
15.94 (±12.10)
17.46 (±15.53)
0.224
12.96 (±10.14)
14.33 (±13.66)
0.880
16.75 (±11.72)
10.66 (±2.30)
0.303
HY: Hoehn and Yahr Disability Stage Scale (median and interquartile range); UPDRS: Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale;
V.B. dos Santos et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Clinical Parkinsonism & Related Disorders 13 (2025) 100372 
5 


---

level of motor impairment compared to the DDK task [40]. Monologue 
tasks require more complex cognitive-linguistic processing, which may 
attenuate or mask subtle speech differences between the subtypes [44].
In contrast, the DDK more clearly highlights these differences as a 
maximum-effort task [45]. Trend analysis reinforces the reliability of the 
results, particularly in the performance of the DDK and monologue tasks 
in the number of syllables and phonation time, where R2 > 0.8, thus 
confirming that the observed differences are consistent over time. These 
findings suggest that these measures can be considered stable and sen­
sitive for monitoring longitudinal changes, strengthening their appli­
cability as potential markers of progression in different clinical subtypes.
Moreover, the literature suggests that the non-tremor subtype is 
associated with more pronounced cognitive impairment than the tremor 
subtype [13,46,47]. However, the monologue task results did not allow 
for a clear differentiation between the two subtypes over the three years. 
These findings indicate that, despite the cognitive differences observed 
in other contexts, the temporal measures extracted from the monologue 
task were not sensitive enough to capture changes over time or between 
subtypes.
The stability of articulatory performance over time in each subtype 
was measured from the tasks of diadochokinesis and monologue, and no 
significant differences were observed. This result indicates that speech 
articulation patterns, assessed through phonation time, syllable count, 
articulation rate, and average syllable duration (ASD), remained rela­
tively constant over three years within both subtypes. Until now, the 
only longitudinal study analyzing speech in subtypes was the one by 
[31], which examined self-perceived ratings of speech severity from the 
Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale over six years without assess­
ing speech measures. They also did not identify significant changes in 
self-perception of speech across motor subtypes over this period. In­
dividuals do not perceive a substantial change in speech quality over 
time, regardless of motor subtype. These findings align with our results, 
even when using different measures, and may support the data regard­
less of the methods employed.
It is also important to highlight that the applicability of composite 
metrics has shown promise in detecting subtle changes, particularly in 
longitudinal studies like ours. Previous research that assessed Parkin­
son’s disease progression without distinguishing between clinical sub­
types identified significant differences in composite metrics derived 
from multiple motor and non-motor variables [22,48]. These findings 
Fig. 2. Path of the results of the articulation variables related to the diadochokinesis task in each subtype in the three-time period.
Table 2 
Pairwise comparison between tremor and non-tremor subtypes over time in the diadochokinesia task.
Tremor vs. Non-tremor
95 % Wald confidence
Mean difference
Standard desviation
df
P-value
Lower
Upper
Syllable number
Baseline
14.61
4.77
1
0.002
5.26
23.97
​
Time 1
12.12
4.17
1
0.004
3.94
20.31
​
Time 2
29.68
8.46
1
<0.001
13.09
46.26
Phonation time
Baseline
2.05
0.87
1
0.019
0.34
3.77
​
Time 1
1.93
0.64
1
0.003
0.67
3.20
​
Time 2
4.07
1.27
1
<0.001
1.58
6.56
Articulation rate
Baseline
0.69
0.32
1
0.033
0.05
1.33
​
Time 1
0.58
0.31
1
0.064
−0.03
1.20
​
Time 2
1.24
0.47
1
0.009
0.30
2.17
ASD
Baseline
−0.04
0.02
1
0.034
−0.08
−0.003
​
Time 1
−0.02
0.01
1
0.154
−0.06
0.01
​
Time 2
−0.03
0.02
1
0.170
−0.08
0.01
ASD: average syllable duration; df: degrees of freedom.
V.B. dos Santos et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Clinical Parkinsonism & Related Disorders 13 (2025) 100372 
6 


---

reinforce the potential of these measures to capture discrete changes 
over time. Therefore, we suggest that future studies consider including 
composite metrics in analyses stratified by subtype to increase sensi­
tivity to phenotype-specific disease progression.
The progression of some secondary motor symptoms of Parkinson’s 
disease, such as speech, may follow a distinct and slower course 
compared to the more well-known motor manifestations [17,49]. 
Although more notable progression was expected over the analyzed 
period, especially in patients with the non-tremor subtype [46,50], the 
data suggest that changes in articulation timing metrics may occur less 
gradually and predictably. This behavior reinforces the hypothesis that 
Parkinson’s disease progression involves multiple complex factors that 
uniquely affect each patient [1,4,6]. Therefore, continuous longitudinal 
follow-up is essential for a more detailed understanding of the evolution 
of the different dimensions of Parkinson’s symptoms and, eventually, for 
developing more targeted and effective intervention strategies focused 
on precision medicine.
Finally, speech serves as a valuable indicator in Parkinson’s disease 
research, offering a non-invasive means of detecting subtle motor 
changes over time [51]. As the disease advances, its impact on speech 
tends to increase, reinforcing its utility as a marker for tracking symptom 
progression, differentiating subtypes, and potentially predicting treat­
ment response [52]. The identification of reliable biomarkers is essential 
for monitoring disease progression, facilitating earlier diagnosis, guid­
ing subtype classification, and informing personalized treatment 
approaches—all of which contribute to improved clinical management 
and outcomes [7,22]. Given this potential, we encourage further lon­
gitudinal research exploring speech characteristics across Parkinson’s 
motor subtypes.
5. Limitations
Some limitations of this study should be considered when inter­
preting and generalizing the findings. First, participants were evaluated 
during the ON phase of dopaminergic medication, which may have 
masked some subtle speech impairments, particularly in the tremor- 
dominant subtype group. Second, the absence of a control group 
limited our ability to contextualize the speech patterns observed in the 
Parkinson’s subtypes relative to typical aging or non-pathological vari­
ation. Third, vocal tasks were not included, which could have expanded 
understanding of the differences between subtypes. Finally, no stratifi­
cation or comparative analysis by sex was performed in this study, due 
to the limited sample size and sample losses at the three evaluation 
moments. Given these limitations, we encourage future studies to 
explore these issues and deepen our understanding of speech patterns in 
different subtypes of Parkinson’s disease.
Fig. 3. Path of the results of the articulation variables related to the monologue task in each subtype in the three-time period. ASD: average syllable duration.
V.B. dos Santos et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Clinical Parkinsonism & Related Disorders 13 (2025) 100372 
7 


---

6. Conclusion
Over three years, speech performance remained relatively stable in 
individuals with both tremor-dominant and non-tremor-dominant Par­
kinson’s disease. Nonetheless, distinct speech patterns emerged between 
the subtypes, particularly during maximum-performance speech tasks. 
Diadochokinesis tasks, in particular, demonstrated a strong ability to 
differentiate between the groups, suggesting their potential as support­
ive markers in identifying motor subtypes of Parkinson’s disease. These 
tasks may aid in the clinical characterization of subtype-specific speech 
patterns. These findings underscore the importance of incorporating 
motor subtype considerations into speech evaluations and highlight the 
potential value of developing tailored speech interventions in clinical 
practice.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Vanessa Brzoskowski dos Santos: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing – original draft, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation, 
Conceptualization. Fernanda Venzke Zardin: Writing – original draft, 
Fig. 4. Trend analysis in each motor subtype in the monologue and diadochokinesia tasks. ASD: average syllable duration.
V.B. dos Santos et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Clinical Parkinsonism & Related Disorders 13 (2025) 100372 
8 


---

Data curation. Rui Rothe-Neves: Writing – review & editing, Writing – 
original draft, Conceptualization. Maira Rozenfeld Olchik: Writing – 
review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Project admin­
istration, 
Methodology, 
Formal 
analysis, 
Data 
curation, 
Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
References
[1] J. Jankovic, Parkinson’s disease: clinical features and diagnosis, J. Neurol. 
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 79 (2008) 368–376.
[2] C. Eggers, D.J. Pedrosa, D. Kahraman, F. Maier, C.J. Lewis, G.R. Fink, et al., 
Parkinson subtypes progress differently in clinical course and imaging pattern, 
PLoS One 7 (2012) e46813.
[3] C. Marras, A. Lang, Parkinson’s disease subtypes: lost in translation? J. Neurol. 
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 84 (2013) 409–415.
[4] C. Adams, J. Suescun, A. Haque, K. Block, S. Chandra, T.M. Ellmore, et al., Updated 
Parkinson’s disease motor subtypes classification and correlation to cerebrospinal 
homovanillic acid and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid levels, Clin Park Relat Disord. 8 
(2023) 100187.
[5] E. Tolosa, G. Wenning, W. Poewe, The diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease, Lancet 
Neurol. 5 (2006) 75–86.
[6] M.J. Armstrong, M.S. Okun, Diagnosis and treatment of parkinson disease: a 
review, J. Am. Med. Assoc. 323 (2020) 548–560.
[7] D. Crosiers, P. Santens, K.R. Chaudhuri, Editorial: prodromal Parkinson’s disease, 
Front. Neurol. 11 (2020) 634490.
[8] T. Li, W. Le, Biomarkers for Parkinson’s disease: how good are they? Neurosci. Bull. 
36 (2020) 183–194.
[9] C.G. Goetz, B.C. Tilley, S.R. Shaftman, G.T. Stebbins, S. Fahn, P. Martinez-Martin, 
et al., Movement Disorder Society-sponsored revision of the Unified Parkinson’s 
Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS): scale presentation and clinimetric testing 
results, Mov. Disord. 23 (2008) 2129–2170.
[10] C. Marras, S.-M. Fereshtehnejad, D. Berg, N.I. Bohnen, K. Dujardin, R. Erro, et al., 
Transitioning from subtyping to precision medicine in parkinson’s disease: a 
purpose-driven approach, Mov. Disord. 39 (2024) 462–471.
[11] M. Prime, J.L. McKay, A.A. Bay, A.R. Hart, C. Kim, A. Abraham, et al., 
Differentiating Parkinson disease subtypes using clinical balance measures, 
J. Neurol. Phys. Ther. 44 (2020) 34–41.
[12] K.A. Josephs, J.Y. Matsumoto, J.E. Ahlskog, Benign tremulous parkinsonism, Arch. 
Neurol. 63 (2006) 354–357.
[13] G. Alves, J.P. Larsen, M. Emre, T. Wentzel-Larsen, D. Aarsland, Changes in motor 
subtype and risk for incident dementia in Parkinson’s disease, Mov. Disord. 21 
(2006) 1123–1130.
[14] T.C. van der Hoek, B.A.A. Bus, P. Matui, M.A. van der Marck, R.A. Esselink, 
I. Tendolkar, Prevalence of depression in Parkinson’s disease: effects of disease 
stage, motor subtype and gender, J. Neurol. Sci. 310 (2011) 220–224.
[15] W.J. Zetusky, J. Jankovic, F.J. Pirozzolo, The heterogeneity of Parkinson’s disease: 
clinical and prognostic implications, Neurology 35 (1985) 522–526.
[16] B.R. Burk, C.R. Watts, The effect of Parkinson disease tremor phenotype on cepstral 
peak prominence and transglottal airflow in vowels and speech, J. Voice 33 (580) 
(2019) e11–580.e19.
[17] J. Rusz, R. Krupiˇcka, S. Víteˇckov´a, T. Tykalov´a, M. Novotný, J. Nov´ak, et al., 
Speech and gait abnormalities in motor subtypes of de-novo Parkinson’s disease, 
CNS Neurosci. Ther. 29 (2023) 2101–2110.
[18] A. Rueda, S. Krishnan, Clustering Parkinson’s and age-related voice impairment 
signal features for unsupervised learning, Adv. Data Sci. Adapt. Anal. 10 (2018) 
1840007.
[19] A. Tsanas, S. Arora, Assessing Parkinson’s disease speech signal generalization of 
clustering results across three countries: Findings in the Parkinson’s voice initiative 
study, in: Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on Biomedical 
Engineering Systems and Technologies. SCITEPRESS - Science and Technology 
Publications, Science and Technology Publications, 2021, https://doi.org/ 
10.5220/0010383001240131.
[20] T. Tykalov´a, J. Rusz, J. ˇSvihlík, S. Bancone, A. Spezia, M.T. Pellecchia, Speech 
disorder and vocal tremor in postural instability/gait difficulty and tremor 
dominant subtypes of Parkinson’s disease, J. Neural Transm. (Vienna) 127 (2020) 
1295–1304.
[21] K.A. Brown, K.A. Spencer, The relationship between speech characteristics and 
motor subtypes of Parkinson’s disease, Am. J. Speech Lang. Pathol. 29 (2020) 
2145–2154.
[22] J. Rusz, J. Hlavniˇcka, M. Novotný, T. Tykalov´a, A. Pelletier, J. Montplaisir, et al., 
Speech biomarkers in rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder and Parkinson 
disease, Ann. Neurol. 90 (2021) 62–75.
[23] Z. Thijs, M. Dumican, Laryngeal symptoms related to motor phenotypes in 
Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review, Laryngoscope Investig Otolaryngol. 8 
(2023) 970–979.
[24] V. Brzoskowski Dos Santos, A.L. Bressanelli, F.V. Zardin, R. Rothe-Neves, M. 
R. Olchik, Speech characteristics across motor subtypes of Parkinson’s disease, Int. 
J. Lang. Commun. Disord. 60 (2025) e70081.
[25] M. Darling-White, Z. Anspach, J.E. Huber, Longitudinal effects of Parkinson’s 
disease on speech breathing during an extemporaneous connected speech task, 
J. Speech Lang. Hear. Res. 65 (2022) 1402–1415.
[26] M. Darling-White, J.E. Huber, The impact of Parkinson’s disease on breath pauses 
and their relationship to speech impairment: a longitudinal study, Am. J. Speech 
Lang. Pathol. 29 (2020) 1910–1922.
[27] N. Miller, S. Andrew, E. Noble, M. Walshe, Changing perceptions of self as a 
communicator in Parkinson’s disease: a longitudinal follow-up study, Disabil. 
Rehabil. 33 (2011) 204–210.
[28] S. Skodda, H. Rinsche, U. Schlegel, Progression of dysprosody in Parkinson’s 
disease over time–a longitudinal study, Mov. Disord. 24 (2009) 716–722.
[29] S. Skodda, A. Flasskamp, U. Schlegel, Instability of syllable repetition as a marker 
of disease progression in Parkinson’s disease: a longitudinal study, Mov. Disord. 26 
(2011) 59–64.
[30] S. Skodda, W. Gr¨onheit, N. Mancinelli, U. Schlegel, Progression of voice and speech 
impairment in the course of Parkinson’s disease: a longitudinal study, Parkinsons 
Dis. 2013 (2013) 389195.
[31] C.R. Watts, Y. Zhang, Progression of self-perceived speech and swallowing 
impairment in early stage Parkinson’s disease: longitudinal analysis of the unified 
Parkinson’s disease rating scale, J. Speech Lang. Hear. Res. 65 (2022) 146–158.
[32] J. Jankovic, M. McDermott, J. Carter, S. Gauthier, C. Goetz, L. Golbe, et al., 
Variable expression of Parkinson’s disease: a base-line analysis of the DATATOP 
cohort .The Parkinson Study Group, Neurology 40 (1990) 1529–1534.
[33] G.T. Stebbins, C.G. Goetz, D.J. Burn, J. Jankovic, T.K. Khoo, B.C. Tilley, How to 
identify tremor dominant and postural instability/gait difficulty groups with the 
movement disorder society unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale: comparison 
with the unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale, Mov. Disord. 28 (2013) 668–670.
[34] D.J. Burn, E.N. Rowan, L.M. Allan, S. Molloy, J.T. O’Brien, I.G. McKeith, Motor 
subtype and cognitive decline in Parkinson’s disease, Parkinson’s disease with 
dementia, and dementia with Lewy bodies, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 77 
(2006) 585–589.
[35] J. Rusz, T. Tykalova, L.O. Ramig, E. Tripoliti, Guidelines for speech recording and 
acoustic analyses in dysarthrias of movement disorders, Mov. Disord. 36 (2021) 
803–814.
[36] J.E. Pierce, S. Cotton, A. Perry, Alternating and sequential motion rates in older 
adults, Int. J. Lang. Commun. Disord. 48 (2013) 257–264.
[37] N.H. de Jong, T. Wempe, Praat script to detect syllable nuclei and measure speech 
rate automatically, Behav. Res. Methods 41 (2009) 385–390.
[38] N.H. de Jong, J. Pacilly, W. Heeren, PRAAT scripts to measure speed fluency and 
breakdown fluency in speech automatically, Assess Educ. 28 (2021) 456–476.
[39] L.J. Arzbecker, K.L. Stipancic, J.D.W. Greenlee, K. Tjaden, Comparing manual and 
automated methods for calculating speaking rate in Parkinson’s disease, JASA 
Express Lett. (2025) 5, https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0036021.
[40] J. Rusz, R. Cmejla, H. Ruzickova, E. Ruzicka, Quantitative acoustic measurements 
for characterization of speech and voice disorders in early untreated Parkinson’s 
disease, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 129 (2011) 350–367.
[41] A.P. Vogel, P. Maruff, Comparison of voice acquisition methodologies in speech 
research, Behav. Res. Methods 40 (2008) 982–987.
[42] A.J. Dobson, A.G. Barnett, An Introduction to Generalized Linear Models, CRC 
Press, 2018.
[43] A.A. Moustafa, S. Chakravarthy, J.R. Phillips, A. Gupta, S. Keri, B. Polner, et al., 
Motor symptoms in Parkinson’s disease: a unified framework, Neurosci. Biobehav. 
Rev. 68 (2016) 727–740.
[44] R.D. Kent, J.F. Kent, Task-based profiles of the dysarthrias, Folia Phoniatr. Logop. 
52 (2000) 48–53.
[45] W. Ziegler, Task-related factors in oral motor control: speech and oral 
diadochokinesis in dysarthria and apraxia of speech, Brain Lang. 80 (2002) 
556–575.
[46] M.A. Thenganatt, J. Jankovic, Parkinson Disease subtypes, JAMA Neurol. 71 
(2014) 499–504.
[47] D.J. Burn, S. Landau, J.V. Hindle, M. Samuel, K.C. Wilson, C.S. Hurt, et al., 
Parkinson’s disease motor subtypes and mood, Mov. Disord. 27 (2012) 379–386.
[48] J.L. Adams, T. Kangarloo, Y. Gong, V. Khachadourian, B. Tracey, D. Volfson, et al., 
Using a smartwatch and smartphone to assess early Parkinson’s disease in the 
WATCH-PD study over 12 months, NPJ. Parkinsons Dis. 10 (2024) 112.
[49] S. Pinto, C. Ozsancak, E. Tripoliti, S. Thobois, P. Limousin-Dowsey, P. Auzou, 
Treatments for dysarthria in Parkinson’s disease, Lancet Neurol. 3 (2004) 547–556.
[50] W.J. Zetusky, J. Jankovic, Laterality and symptom association in Parkinson’s 
disease, Arch. Neurol. 42 (1985) 1132–1133.
[51] L. Moro-Velazquez, J.A. Gomez-Garcia, J.D. Arias-Londo˜no, N. Dehak, J.I. Godino- 
Llorente, Advances in Parkinson’s Disease detection and assessment using voice 
and speech: a review of the articulatory and phonatory aspects, Biomed. Signal 
Process. Control 66 (2021) 102418.
[52] N.P. Narendra, B. Schuller, P. Alku, The detection of Parkinson’s disease from 
speech using voice source information, IEEE ACM Trans. Audio Speech Lang 
Process. 29 (2021) 1925–1936.
V.B. dos Santos et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Clinical Parkinsonism & Related Disorders 13 (2025) 100372 
9 


---
*Full text extracted from PDF for MemoVoice V3 algorithm training.*
